# Monolithic Vs Microservices architecture

## Difference between Monolithic and microservice architecture

<table data-full-width="false"><thead><tr><th>Monolithic Architecture</th><th>Microservices</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td><strong>Single, large application</strong> with all components tightly coupled.</td><td><strong>Distributed system</strong> consisting of loosely coupled, independent services.</td></tr><tr><td><strong>Scaling involves scaling the entire application.</strong></td><td><strong>Scaling can be done selectively</strong> on individual services.</td></tr><tr><td>Changes or updates <strong>require deploying the entire monolith.</strong></td><td>Changes can be made and <strong>deployed to specific services</strong> without affecting others.</td></tr><tr><td><strong>Difficult to understand</strong> and maintain as the code base grows.</td><td><strong>Easier to understand</strong> and maintain as <strong>services are smaller and focused</strong> on specific functionality.</td></tr><tr><td><strong>Lack of flexibility in choosing different technologies</strong> for different components.</td><td><strong>Services can be developed using different technologies</strong>, chosen based on individual service requirements.</td></tr><tr><td><strong>Limited agility and slower development</strong> cycles.</td><td><strong>Improved agility</strong> with <strong>faster development cycles due to independent service</strong> development and deployment.</td></tr><tr><td>More prone to system-wide failures due to <strong>tightly coupled components</strong>.</td><td><strong>Failures are isolated</strong> to individual services, <strong>minimising impact on the overall system</strong>.</td></tr><tr><td><strong>Testing and debugging can be more complex</strong> due to inter-dependencies.</td><td>Testing and debugging can be done more <strong>independently for each service</strong>.</td></tr><tr><td><strong>Resource utilization may not be optimized</strong> as the entire monolith runs even if only a subset of functionality is needed.</td><td><strong>Resource utilization is optimized</strong> as services can be scaled independently based on demand.</td></tr><tr><td><strong>Suitable for simpler applications with limited complexity and scalability needs.</strong></td><td><strong>Suitable for complex applications with evolving requirements and high scalability needs.</strong></td></tr></tbody></table>
